My Life by Julia Gunn
I was born at Tawin Hospital, Merioneth on the 13th of August, 1950.
It should have been at the District Hospital Machynllyf, but it was being decorated at the time.
My parents were Kenneth and Moira Rawlins.
My dad told me that he walked from Dolgellau the next morning to see me and he checked all my fingers and toes to make sure they were all there.
I was the eldest of six children.
I was born on a Sunday, my favourite day.
When I was born, my dad lodged with Aunty Maggie, wife of Coris Jones, at Dolgellau, as mum and dad didn't have their own home yet.
He worked on the summer service Crossfield buses at Dolgellau.
Mam lived at Davarnnewydd, Top Coris, with her mam and sisters Jula and Ira.
When the summer ended, dad came to live at Davarnnewydd and by then I was thoroughly spoilt by them all.
I cried continuously at night and they even tied a rope onto the wooden cradle so that it could be rocked to send me to sleep.
When I had my own baby girl, Sharon, we did the same with her, but it was a big silver cross pram.
We moved to live to Pensarn na Brillefenni when dad worked at the slave quarry across the road.
One day, while working as an apprentice rockman, a large rock fell on his right hand and almost severed his fingers right off.
They were hanging on by a little flesh.
The ambulance that was taken into Aberystwyth Hospital had to go around Llanwryn because of the flood.
While mam was waiting in the corridor, I took my first steps holding on to a wheelchair.
After a very, very long time, dad's fingers did heal.
My parents moved from Aberllfenni to number one ac her cottages ysgolgaelog. It's the one where the garage is now.
By now I had another sister, Anne, and a little brother called Brian.
I can remember the regular visits from the Johnny Winyons man selling strings of onions from his bicycle.
Also one visit by an Indian in a turban selling brushes, etc.
who became very angry when mam said she did not want anything and he threatened to burn the house down.
Most likely my mam had no money anyway.
I also remember my treasure box. It was a green shoe box and it had books, pencils, etc. inside.
I still have treasure boxes even today and have one each for my grandchildren, Connor, Curtis, Kieran, Cameron and little Kelsey.
I remember moving up to the council houses in 1955.
It was so exciting. A brand new house with three bedrooms, a bathroom, toilets, even a parlour and living room, kitchen and hot water.
Mam chose number 13 because she used to bring us up to this part of the field to pick mushrooms.
Nine untied rollands of Auntie Blod also moved up here from ac her cottages.
So did Auntie Annie and Uncle Dick. It was he who carried my baby brother Brian who was six months old up there.
As we grew older, Brian had the boxroom and us girls shared the largest bedroom.
We had so much fun making up stories and songs.
I often wished that I was back there again because my childhood holds a lot of happy memories for me and we couldn't have wished for nicer parents.
I started school at Pampertho when I was three years old.
I didn't like the headmistress Cassie Williams because she would hit you across the head if you didn't know the answers.
The cook Mrs Davies Lansend was lovely and I always remember her lapsed ghost with a chunk of cheese and a fabulous mock cream and jam tart.
BT was done in the yard in your knickers on raffia mats, passing beanbags between your feet and dropping them behind your head.
I remember going to the National Ice Denboard with my cousin Betty and friend Annetta in matching pink dresses.
Also singing M'vi si Maggi'r Baban with a lovely old wooden cradle on the stage.
We didn't win but it was very important to me.
I'm afraid I hated every day of school and would always pretend I had a tummy ache but Mam wouldn't believe me.
I did pass my Lend Plus which was quite important in those days and Mam and Dad bought me a gold bracelet.
I had a good time living in Caenw, Sysgogaiog.
My sisters and I were everywhere. We would play on the quarry tip, down the river and up the mountains.
It was great having someone to play and explore with.
Jen was usually my partner as we both liked cowboy films and would play in Caecinus.
She would be the low ranger and I would be Tomtum. We would swap over now and then.
There was a shop in the village and it belonged to Nora.
Mam would send us down for five woodbanks for Dad and Nora would split the packet of ten up for him.
I always remember some fizzy sweets that you could pop in water to make a drink and of course the black jacks, full for a penny.
On the way to Nora's we had to pass a monkey called Cheetah.
He was chained on a tree by a sink shed. He belonged to Miss Morgan, who was actually our neighbour and lived at number 12.
This monkey wasn't always safe but I think Passersby would torment it so we would pass it on the other side of the road.
Dad worked for Dee Williams and Sons. Jen and I would go with him in the lorry sometimes, Saturdays and holidays.
We'd start off about two o'clock in the morning to avoid heavy traffic and I'd feel so great sitting so high up in the cab and think to myself how lucky I was to have a dad who drove lorries. He was my hero.
I also used to go on the motorbike with him. Once we went to Castellabere on the Aerial Arrow 200cc but when it was time to go home it wouldn't start so we pushed it all the way home.
He was so cross when he found out later that the cable had come out from the condenser.
I can remember mam and dad going to the TT races at the Isle of Man. I still have the booklets and lockets they brought home. It has mam and my photo inside.
They both rode in their own race too. It was the first derby rally race through Tallowen, Dharrowen etc. They came first.
The motorbike was a black AGS 350. Mam was wearing a dark green suedeck jacket with elastic around the waist and she looked lovely in it.
We had a village hall at the forestry camp and every year the WI would hold a jumble sale.
I loved these jumble sales and inside the front door there would be a lucky dip, a barrel full of sawdust in which toys, sweets etc. were hidden inside.
I was always lucky, never disappointed because I had either a pen, rubber or pencil sharpener.
Our Christmas parties were also held at the home. I can see it all now. The black stove lit with a large fire guard around it and tables laid with food.
Father Christmas would come in half way carrying his sack full of presents and we would sing.
Pwy sy'n dŵa dros y brynna'n ddysdaw ddysdaw bach, ai fardd yn llais, ai fardd yn wym, a rhywbeth yn oesach.
Siôn con, siôn con, tyr dyma, tyr dylawr.
The fate of Varsley Gwyn where the bowmans lived was also a special time, cream teas, stores etc. I always saved enough money to go to the fortune teller.
My dad's uncle Evans and Auntie Jane lived at Bryndilas with their dog Meg, also Auntie Jane's brother Uncle Lewis.
I always remember Auntie Jane as a cheerful person but it was always difficult to pass her house without being seen.
If you were you would have to sit on the setel in the kitchen and be interrogated but it was worth it most of the time because she would give me money for sweets to spend at Noras.
I realise now that she was lonely as she didn't have children of her own. Her house was full of antiques and I loved them, especially the dresser, grandfather clock and settle.
There was one item that had stayed in my memory and it was a large framed picture on the wall of a little boy being questioned by a round head soldier about the whereabouts of his father, a cavalier.
It was of course, and When Did You Last See Your Father, which was painted by WF Eames in 1878.
Uncle Lewis was great too, he would come up to our house for a bath once a week and we would wait for him to get into it, fetch the stool from the kitchen and tap on the window above the door.
We couldn't see anything, it was covered in steam. He did play along with it and it became a regular joke.
Aunty Lucy from Caernarfon would call to see them very often and I remember when Harold and David, her sons, came one year.
She took me to a farm called Hayne Haverd to see the Rowlands family and they had twin girls. I have been back since and had a lovely welcome.
I do miss them all and wish I had listened more to them talking about the family history.